Gas estimation for transaction with custom and paymasters accounts (#318)
matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs: docs/dev/developer-guides/transactions/fee-model.md

- **Reuse as many storage slots as possible.** Only the state diff is published on Ethereum.
- **Users should share as many storage slots as possible.** If 100 users update a storage slot of your contract in a single block, the diff will be published only once. In the future, we will introduce reimbursement for the users, so that the costs for updating shared storage slots are split between the users.
- **Reuse the contract code if possible.** On Ethereum, avoiding constructor parameters and putting them into constants reduces some of the gas costs upon contract deployment. On zkSync the opposite is true: deploying the same bytecode for contracts, while changing only constructor parameters can lead to substantial fee savings.

> ## Gas estimation during transaction: For custom and paymaster accounts

Reviewer: reads better if we swap "For Paymaster and Custom Accounts:

On Ethereum, there is a constant of 21000 gas that should cover all the intrinsic costs of processing a transaction: checking the signature and updating the nonce of the account. 

On zkSync Era, it's quite different, because we support custom accounts that may take a slightly different (typically a bit higher) number of gas than EOAs. 
We provide a convenient way for anyone to estimate the cost of a transaction regardless of the type of account. 

### Changes in the `validateTransaction`

> At present, the `validateTransaction` method fails if the signature is incorrect and returns `success=true` for a valid signature. The system entirely disregards the `returndata`. However, we migrated to a new approach, where the success of the `validateTransaction` method depends on it returning a magic string. Any other `returndata` will be deemed invalid and rejected by the system.

Reviewer 2: I think we should not mention how it was before (returning sucess=true) and just explain what's expected from the validateTransaction method now

> At present, the `validateTransaction` method fails if the signature is incorrect and returns `success=true` for a valid signature. The system entirely disregards the `returndata`. However, we migrated to a new approach, where the success of the `validateTransaction` method depends on it returning a magic string. Any other `returndata` will be deemed invalid and rejected by the system.

Reviewer 3: > At present

It is not how it is done presently, this is how it used to be. The sentence says that "we migrated to a new approach" :)

Author: I rephrased to 

> The `validateTransaction` method fails if the signature is incorrect and returns `success=true` for a valid signature. The system entirely disregards the `returndata`. However, the success of the `validateTransaction` method depends on it returning a magic string. Any other `returndata` will be deemed invalid and rejected by the system.

@StanislavBreadless make sense?

Reviewer 3: @krofax 

How it used to be:

- `validateTransaction` is considered successful whenever it does not revert (i.e. returns `success = true`). For invalid signatures the method reverts.

How it is now:

- `validateTransaction` is considered successful whenever it does not revert (i.e. returns `success = true`) AND it returns the magic string. For invalid signatures, the method does not revert, but it returns invalid magic.

A lot of time has passed since the change, so we can only describe the part of how it is now.

Also, saying that the returndata is disregarded, but then saying that it is used to check the magic sounds a bit contradictive, but up to you

Author: @StanislavBreadless I updated this part to be 

> The `validateTransaction` method is considered successful whenever it does not revert (i.e. returns `success = true`). And it returns the magic string. For invalid signatures, the method does not revert, but it returns invalid magic. However, the success of the `validateTransaction` method depends on it returning a magic string.

What do you think?

### Notes on custom accounts

Currently, the `validateTransaction` method of the AA (or the paymaster `validateAndPayForPaymasterTransaction` method) always tries to perform the same amount of computation (including storage accesses) regardless of whether the transaction is validated correctly. By default, the operator provides a transaction structure with the available information during fee estimation. To replace the signature, an invalid 65-byte ECDSA signature is utilized. The `DefaultAccount` (used by EOAs), during fee estimation, executes as many operations, including signature verification, and returns only `bytes4(0)` instead of magic. In the case of a custom account with multiple signers, the account may wish to simulate signature validation for all the provided signers.

> The code of the validation step of each account can be found in the [DefaultAccount implementation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-system-contracts/blob/5a6c728576de5db68ad577a09f34e7b85c374192/contracts/DefaultAccount.sol#L65)

Reviewer: Lets link to the file directly and not a specific version - https://github.com/matter-labs/era-system-contracts/blob/main/contracts/DefaultAccount.sol

### Notes on the transaction’s length

> zkSync Era sends state diffs onchain, but the cost for the transaction will still mildly depend on its length (because long transactions need to be stored in the memory of the operator), also long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account. However, the signature (as well as its length) is not available at the time of fee estimation and so there is no correct way to precisely estimate the cost of the transaction. For now, we will compensate for it by multiplying the recommended cost of the transaction by a few percent. In the future, we may introduce the following:

Reviewer: - memory of the operator), also long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account.
 
 I think we should have a period and not comma between these 2

- Each account will be able to implement a method called `fillPartialTransaction` that will fill the signature with the substituted value which will be used for fee estimation.

### Changes for `eth_estimateGas`

Since the entire flow for tx validation + execution will be executed to get the transaction’s fee, the operator will manually put the necessary balance (if needed) for the account before the emulation is run to conduct the default account’s `payForTransaction` method.

The `eth_estimateGas` method itself will use binary search to find the smallest gas value under which the transaction *succeeds*.

### Difference from geth

> Just like geth, we will use binary search. However, there will be some notable differences in gas estimation from the behavior of geth:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Just like Geth, we will use binary search for gas estimation. However, there will be some notable differences in gas estimation from the behaviour of Geth:
```

> - Unlike geth, it is impossible to track out of gas errors on zkSync Era. The main reason is that the “actual” execution will happen inside the DefaultAccount system contract and due to the 63/64 rule when a high number of gas is provided, the call to the `execute` method of the DefaultAccount will NOT fail due to out of gas even though the subcall to the `transaction.to` contract did fail with an out of gas error.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Unlike Geth, it is impossible to track  *out of gas* errors on zkSync Era. The main reason is that the “actual” execution will happen inside the DefaultAccount system contract and due to the 63/64 rule when a high number of gas is provided, the call to the `execute` method of the DefaultAccount will NOT fail due to out of gas even though the subcall to the `transaction.to` contract did fail with an out of gas error.
```

> - During simulation, geth uses `tx.gasprice = 0` to make sure that the user can pay the fee even though the `tx.origin` in the simulation may not have any balance at all - This means that when `estimateGas` from an empty account is called, no `value` can be provided to such call as this account has zero balance to cover this value. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- During simulation, Geth uses `tx.gasprice = 0` to make sure that the user can pay the fee even though the `tx.origin` in the simulation may not have any balance at all. This means that when `estimateGas` from an empty account is called, no `value` can be provided to such call as this account has zero balance to cover this value. 
```

> We could do that, but that would mean that the `payForTransaction` of the Account Abstraction protocol would do nothing and thus be much cheaper than it will be during the actual transaction validation. Instead, the operator will increase the balance of the user’s account by `tx.maxFeePerErg * tx.ergsLimit`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We could do that, but that would mean that the `payForTransaction` of the Account Abstraction protocol would do nothing and thus be much cheaper than it will be during the actual transaction validation. Instead, the operator will increase the balance of the user’s account by `tx.maxFeePerGas * tx.gasLimit`.
```

> We could do that, but that would mean that the `payForTransaction` of the Account Abstraction protocol would do nothing and thus be much cheaper than it will be during the actual transaction validation. Instead, the operator will increase the balance of the user’s account by `tx.maxFeePerErg * tx.ergsLimit`.

Reviewer 4: is this related to second point "During simulation, geth ...."? 
then it should be in the second section.   
Now it looks  to be separate 
<img width="955" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72273339/227505267-d2713add-0446-4089-bd5a-fe4728ac8b6c.png">

Reviewer 4: for me

- Each account will be able to implement a method called `fillPartialTransaction` that will fill the signature with the substituted value which will be used for fee estimation.

### Changes for `eth_estimateGas`

Since the entire flow for tx validation + execution will be executed to get the transaction’s fee, the operator will manually put the necessary balance (if needed) for the account before the emulation is run to conduct the default account’s `payForTransaction` method.

The `eth_estimateGas` method itself will use binary search to find the smallest gas value under which the transaction *succeeds*.

### Difference from geth

Just like geth, we will use binary search. However, there will be some notable differences in gas estimation from the behavior of geth:

- Unlike geth, it is impossible to track out of gas errors on zkSync Era. The main reason is that the “actual” execution will happen inside the DefaultAccount system contract and due to the 63/64 rule when a high number of gas is provided, the call to the `execute` method of the DefaultAccount will NOT fail due to out of gas even though the subcall to the `transaction.to` contract did fail with an out of gas error.

> That means that while geth can distinguish between “empty error” and “out of gas”, we can’t. If during gas estimation we fail to find the necessary `gasLimit`, the following error will be returned _“can not estimate gas: the transaction either fails or requires more gas than allowed”_.

Reviewer 3: I checked with the code, the error message is different from the one in the doc, so let's remove this sentence altogether to not confuse people

- **Users should share as many storage slots as possible.** If 100 users update a storage slot of your contract in a single block, the diff will be published only once. In the future, we will introduce reimbursement for the users, so that the costs for updating shared storage slots are split between the users.
- **Reuse the contract code if possible.** On Ethereum, avoiding constructor parameters and putting them into constants reduces some of the gas costs upon contract deployment. On zkSync the opposite is true: deploying the same bytecode for contracts, while changing only constructor parameters can lead to substantial fee savings.

## Gas estimation during transaction: For custom and paymaster accounts

On Ethereum, there is a constant of 21000 gas that should cover all the intrinsic costs of processing a transaction: checking the signature and updating the nonce of the account. 

On zkSync Era, it's quite different, because we support custom accounts that may take a slightly different (typically a bit higher) number of gas than EOAs. 
We provide a convenient way for anyone to estimate the cost of a transaction regardless of the type of account. 

> ### Changes in the `validateTransaction`

Reviewer 3: There should be a space before the title

```suggestion

### Changes in the `validateTransaction`
```

> Right now, the `validateTransaction` fails if the signature is not correct and returns `success=true` otherwise, while the `returndata` is discarded completely. We will migrate to a different approach, where the `validateTransaction` method to be considered successful must return some magic string. Any other `returndata` will be considered invalid and will be rejected by the system.  

Reviewer 3: This was a part of the internal spec. Please remove this paragraph
```suggestion
It used to be the case for `validateTransaction` to fail if the signature is not correct and return `success=true` otherwise, while the `returndata` is discarded completely. We have migrated to a different approach, where the `validateTransaction` method to be considered successful must return a magic string. Any other `returndata` will be considered invalid and will be rejected by the system.  
```

> Now, `validateTransaction` method of the AA (or the paymaster `validateAndPayForPaymasterTransaction` method), should always try to do the same amount of computation (and especially storage accesses) as it would have done if the transaction was indeed validated correctly. By default, the operator will provide a transaction structure that contains as much information as is available to the operator at the time of the fee estimation. As a substitute for the signature, an invalid 65-byte ECDSA signature will be used. The `DefaultAccount` (the one that is used by EOAs) will do as many operations as possible (including signature verification) and only return `bytes4(0)` instead of magic. If, for instance, the wallet is a custom account, with multiple signers, then it may want to simulate the validation of the signatures of all the provided signers.

Reviewer 3: please use Present Simple when talking about the current properties of the system

> So roughly the code of the validation step of each account will look the following way:

Reviewer 3: Please use this section as a guide for external developers on how they should build their custom accounts. The doc that I've sent to you was about how we built DefaultAccount (EOAs).

At the very least the we should rather use `should ` instead of `will`, etc. Generally we should use Present Simple here (`do/does`) or recommendations (`should`)

```solidity

>  function validateTransaction(

Reviewer 3: It is better to supply the link to the DefaultAccount implementation here: 

https://github.com/matter-labs/era-system-contracts/blob/5a6c728576de5db68ad577a09f34e7b85c374192/contracts/DefaultAccount.sol#L65

        bytes32, // _txHash
        bytes32 _suggestedSignedHash,
        Transaction calldata _transaction
    ) external payable override ignoreNonBootloader returns (bytes4 magic) {
        // ...
        // normal validation logic
        // ...
         
        // The execution before the following `if` statement should look as close as to the execution under incorrect 
        // signature as possible
        if(!validSignature) {
           // Setting magic to 0 to make sure that the transaction will not be accepted on mainnet
           magic = bytes4(0);  
        } else {
           magic = // setting to actual magic value which should be returned by the correct signature validation
        }
    }
```

### Notes on the transaction’s length

> zkSync Era sends state diffs onchain, and the cost for the transaction will still mildly depend on its length (because long transactions need to be stored in memory of the operator), also long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account. However, the signature (as well as its length) is not available at the time of fee estimation and so there is no correct way to precisely estimate the cost of the transaction. For now, we will compensate for it by multiplying the recommended cost of the transaction by **5%**. In the future, we will introduce the following:

Reviewer 3: Let's not hardcode "5%" here. It is better to give us some room to change it without updating the documentation. Better to say "by a few percents".

Also, it is better not to say "we will introduce the following" (I am sorry if it was present in the doc this way). We should rather say "may", because we do not commit to it, though it is likely what may happen in the future

- Each account will be able to implement a method called `fillPartialTransaction` that will fill the signature with the substituted value which will be used for fee estimation.

### Changes for `eth_estimateGas`

Since the entire flow for tx validation + execution will be executed to get the transaction’s fee, the operator will manually put the necessary balance (if needed) for the account before the emulation is run to conduct the default account’s `payForTransaction` method.

> Note, that the operator will NOT do the same with the paymaster (i.e. if a transaction has a paymaster, the paymaster MUST have the proper balance beforehand). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

It was an outdated part, it does

The `eth_estimateGas` method itself will use binary search to find the smallest gas value under which the transaction *succeeds*.

### Difference from geth

Just like geth, we will use binary search. However, there will be some notable differences in gas estimation from the behavior of geth:

> - Unlike geth, it is impossible to track out of gas errors on zkSync Era. The main reason is that the “actual” execution will happen inside the DefaultAccount system contract and due to the 63/64 rule when a high number of gas is provided, the call to the `execute` method of the DefaultAccount will NOT fail even though the subcall to the `transaction.to` contract did fail with an out of gas error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Unlike geth, it is impossible to track out of gas errors on zkSync Era. The main reason is that the “actual” execution will happen inside the DefaultAccount system contract and due to the 63/64 rule when a high number of gas is provided, the call to the `execute` method of the DefaultAccount will NOT fail due to out of gas even though the subcall to the `transaction.to` contract did fail with an out of gas error.
```

> That means that while geth can distinguish between “empty error” and “out of gas”, we can’t. If during gas estimation we fail to find the necessary `gasLimit`, will return the following error _“can not estimate gas: the transaction either fails or requires more gas than allowed”_.

Reviewer 3: "the following error will be returned" or "the API will return ..."
